Why do Sports Stats Keep Getting More Complicated?

There has been a profound shift in how sports are analyzed. Sports have always been a numbers game, with matches often being summable in a single score. 
Yet, as the years pass, sports involve more numbers. Heck, modern players are using iPads on the bench to analyze their real-time performance. Why do 
sports stats keep getting more complicated and who keeps complicating them? 

Bill James pioneered Sabermetrics in the 70s and 80s. Sabermetrics is the use of statistical analysis to forecast a baseball player’s performance. 
It’s what allows us to estimate how a player will do against a pitcher he’s never faced before, or quantifies a player’s value into a single, 
cross-positional score. When used correctly, these statistical insights can give David a chance against Goliath.

The most famous case of Sabermetric success is the 2002 Oakland Athletics. The Athletics, despite having a scarce budget, went on a 20-game-win-streak 
that year—the longest MLB win-streak in a century. Oakland’s management built a team to rival the Yankees (consistently the best team in baseball), 
without a Yankee-sized cheque book because they used predictive player analysis with computational models. This brilliant season was the subject of 
a Michael Lewis novel, “Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game,” later adapted into a Brad Pitt film.

After this mainstream exposure and the increasing accessibility and acceptance of computational analysis, sabermetrics started to take over baseball and 
moved into other sports. By the mid-2000s, every MLB team had doubled their statistics department and other sports started to implement advanced metrical 
ideas before fans could catch up.

While baseball has aggregated stats over its history like few other sports, there are practical applications of similar advanced metrics in most sports.
One sport that has embraced the predictive statistical revolution is basketball. Whether it be simple per-minute statistics, or complex equations like
all-in-one player ratings (player efficiency rating), modern-day basketball is just as statistically driven as baseball. Other sports like soccer, handball
and hockey have implemented an expected goals stat—estimating how many goals a team “should” have scored based on their opportunities. And advanced predictive
models tell modern football coaches each in-game decision they should make, determining millions of moods, every Sunday.

So, saying predictive analysis has caused a drastic change in sports is an understatement. Which brings us  to one of the most baffling instances of Sabermetric
tomfoolery: when Barry Bonds was intentionally walked with the bases loaded. Bonds was so dominant, that the predictive analytics told Arizona Diamondbacks
management that they should walk him in the ninth, allowing a run, in order to face the next batter. According to their models, Bonds’ chances of driving in
multiple runs was higher than the chance of the following batter driving in a single run. So, Arizona intentionally walked him and it worked. The next batter 
flew-out, and the Diamondbacks won 8-7.

While this may be an extreme example—Barry Bonds was the most dangerous hitter ever—it demonstrates the grip advanced metrics can have on sports. It grips 
organizations so hard that managers will intentionally allow points, risking embarrassment because the numbers said so. Luckily for the Diamondbacks, on that 
day, the right decision was made, and the fans went home happy. But statisticians never deal in certainties. This allows for decisions that don’t always pay off. 
For example, when the 2022 Los Angeles Angels walked Corey Seager with the bases loaded, just to have the next batter get a hit. Failures like this have created 
a great modern sports debate: are advanced metrics better than traditional ones, like the “eye-test,” or are they just an overcomplication of already complex games?

The unpredictability in advanced metrics has introduced new dynamics, forcing a delicate balance between tradition and innovation. While statistical analysis has 
undeniably reshaped teams’ in-game approach, it’s not without error. The human element will always play the largest role in sports, no matter how predictive our 
analytics get. The “eye-test,” and other traditional metrics older than sliced bread, offer an important counterpoint to the contemporary data driven approach, 
emphasizing a more holistic understanding of the players and sports. In the quest for athletic success managers, players, and fans find themselves at the intersection
of tradition and innovation, weighing insights from now and then. This intricate relationship between the new quantifiable and the traditional immeasurable adds a layer
of richness to sports analytics, ensuring that we keep our roots amid the relentless march of statistical innovation.

In conclusion, baseball Sabermetrics have spearheaded statistical analysis, starting a multi-sport revolution. From the success of the Oakland Athletics, to walking in 
runs, to the 3 new stats you see every game, advanced metrics have undeniably left a lasting mark on sports. The ongoing debate surrounding their efficacy and impact 
highlights the dynamic nature of this transformation. While advanced metrics provide valuable insights, the uncertainty inherent in sports ensures that the contemporary
metrics and the “eye-test” must coexist, offering a nuanced perspective in the evolving realm of sports analysis. 
